	A key controversy in South African housing policy has implicated the difference between what we can call “welfare” projects versus “developmental” projects. The logic of the former category is the production of a supply of houses to meet a demand, without regard for the role of location. The logic of the latter category is driven by spillover effects. In contrast to “developmental” investment , public investment in housing as a welfare good does not crowd in a broader improvement in public goods.
	In Johannesburg, this has been the crux of policy debate. A senior official in the city’s Housing Department reported that under Mayor Amos Masondo, mayor of the metropolitan municipality of Johannesburg between 2000 to 2011, there was a persistent drive to develop on cheap, publicly-owned land on the periphery of the city. This drove a dynamic that did not stimulate further investment “That was a Masondo error because the land was there and what you will find is that when you started projects peripheral or otherwise and you’ve identified 5,000 families to be housed. As soon as you start the numbers start to increase because people start to descend because there is an initiative taking place and they want to be part of it.” The key takeaway here is that the lack of broader spillovers, as illustrated by the lack of a price effect, leads to a crunch in the overall demand without crowding in any further investment to meet this demand.
	Though funding for public housing projects has come through national government grants managed by provincial authorities, it is generally the role of municipal government to “package” and plan these projects. Multiple senior housing officials in the city noted that the magnitude of public grants for housing projects has rarely, if ever, been sufficient for meeting the more spatially-targeted policies that began to emerge under Masondo’s successor, Parks Tau, who governed from 2011 to 2016. Tau’s flagship urban policy, known as “corridors of freedom” (COF), was designed to stitch together the core-periphery divide that has defined Johannesburg’s spatial layout. Though the authors interviewed officials in the housing department towards the end of Tau’s term, these officials could not point to more than two projects that could be said to clearly represent the shift from the purely “welfare”-oriented model of housing delivery.
	The debate goes back to the early negotiations for housing policy associated with the Constitutional transition to democracy in South Africa in the early1990s. A participant in the National Housing Forum, the primary negotiating space for housing policy, noted that the “welfare” orientation was baked into the construction of the subsidy model: “We still don’t think about markets. You give someone in Cosmo [a large housing development in Johannesburg] and someone in the Free State [a mostly rural province] the exact same house and that is a completely unequal allocation actually.”
